# Descriptions of AI Models

## Speech-to-text

### Google Cloud AI with Gemini

Google provides a speech-to-text model API providing up to 60 minutes of transcribing audio per month using the Google Gemini model. The advanced speech AI utilizes Chirp, Google Cloud's foundation model for speech trained on a massive amount of data. Supporting 125 languages, the trained model has recognition and transcription for more spoken languages and accents which can assist many different users across the world. Providing three methods to perform this feature: synchronous, asynchronous, and streaming. Each method returns text results for post-processing, periodically, or in real-time to better suit a user's needs.


### Vapi AI

Vapi AI has a pipeline for voice-to-text and text-to-voice integration, which can be used separately. Their product is known to have very high-quality transcription, which is essential as the app will perform better if it makes fewer mistakes. It also supports multiple languages, which is beneficial as Liquid Galaxy has many users around the world, so integrating this feature will be useful for accessibility for everyone to enjoy. The service supports development on Flutter which is compatible with our technologies, but does cost money every time it is in use, which may be unfeasible.


### Deepgram

Deepgram has an accurate (22% lower word error rate) API that is fast and many times cheaper than Vapi AI's services. On top of the cheap prices, Deepgram gives every new account $200 in credits, with the cheapest rate costing $0.0020/min and the most expensive costing $0.0145/min, the credits can last for 13,793 to 100,000 minutes of recording usage. If this is approved by the admins of the organization, I would need to test various models out on my own time to check for their accuracy to integrate into my app. Deepgram's voice-to-text is vastly faster than other services, being able to live-transcribe and transcribe one hour of audio in twelve seconds.


### Flutter speech_to_text

The speech_to_text library will allow the users to talk into the mic of the application using the speech_to_text library provided in Flutter, which was built to target commands and short phrases and not long conversations, which is exactly what we are looking for in this application. Compatible with Dart 3, the library allows us to integrate the features with the latest flutter updates. As a package on pub.dev, the usage of the feature is free for developers, which is the best option in terms of cost and maintainability. As Liquid Galaxy is open source, reducing the costs of apps will be the most beneficial to the organization to ensure that the products are free for users to use and enjoy without any limitations or costs.


## Text-to-speech

### Google Cloud AI with WaveNet

The Google Cloud AI's text-to-speech API allows users to input text and get back an audio file in response, providing natural-sounding audio which can be customizable with options such as language, gender, and accent for all users to use the app. WaveNet was one of the first text-to-speech models that sounded natural-sounding speech, starting at Google Deepmind. The pricing is very feasible for our use cases, as the WaveNet model's usage is free of charge for every 1 million characters per month.


### Bark

Bark is a text-to-speech model by Suno AI, which will be used as the final layer in the application's process to help us voice the story generated by our LLM model to the tablet so users can listen to it. Not only does this provide accessibility features so everyone can enjoy the application, but it is also a way to integrate the latest growth of AI into Liquid Galaxy applications one step at a time.

Used in mentor Vedant's GSoC project from last year (Voice CMS), Bark can take text and generate a voice to read the given input, as well as create other audio, such as background music or sound effects which could make this application have a more Liquid Galaxy immersive experience. Focusing on the main portion which is the generated story, we will display the story on a slave machine for the user to be able to read and it will also be read out loud through the tablet. Bark's API processes the given text and produces a WAV file, which will be opened automatically on the local devices to initiate the narration upon generation of the audio file.


### Vapi AI

Vapi AI also provides a text-to-speech feature as part of its voice-to-voice pipeline, however as explained above, the cost is very high compared to other services on this list. By combining other services, I believe it is possible to achieve the same/better quality of the voice-to-voice feature we are trying to integrate into the Flutter project without having too high of costs like used in this service.

### llElevenLabs

This API generates an MP3 file from text in 29 languages, which can be customized to provide accessibility to as many users in the world as we can. With its very low latency of approximately 400ms using the Turbo model, this API can provide fast results so users don't have a large delay when waiting for a response back from the app combined with Groq's LPU. The feature provides a free tier allowing up to 10,000 characters per month, which may be too little considering we have users from around the world who may use our app. The pricing isn't too cheap considering other options, but the multi-language feature is appealing to allow everyone to use the app.

### Deepgram

Deepgram's text-to-speech feature is the cheapest by far, costing $0.0150 for characters with $200 given in credits with every new account, the cost to maintain the app using Deepgram's API is very low while providing very high-quality transcriptions. The speed of the application is very quick compared to other services and is 30% more accurate than other services on average, leading the market across use-case categories.

### ChatTTS

ChatTTS offers several benefits, including multi-language support, making it accessible to a wide range of users. Its extensive training on approximately 10 million hours of Chinese and English data results in high-quality, natural-sounding voice synthesis. ChatTTS is well-suited for dialog tasks typically managed by LLMs, providing fluid conversations for various applications and services.

The project team plans to open source a trained base model, enabling academic researchers and developers to further study and develop the technology. Additionally, the team is focused on enhancing the model's controllability, adding watermarks, and integrating it with LLMs to ensure safety and reliability. ChatTTS offers ease of use by requiring only text input to generate corresponding voice files, making it a convenient solution for voice synthesis.

### Flutter flutter_tts

The flutter_tts library is a package on Dart that is an alternative to Bark, where API endpoints are provided to pass in a text prompt. This library gives us a variety of customization speech options for accessibility, allowing us to adjust the tone, speed, pitch, and other options. From the development side, it can speak messages directly from a function call or generate a WAV file, for us to have the option to be flexible during development. The library is still being maintained and as Flutter is open source, there is a wide community to support developers if we run into issues during development. The packages on Flutter are also a lot less likely to ever cost anything for usage in the future for maintainability. Like the speech_to_text library from earlier, the package is on pub.dev, providing the feature to developers free of cost. This would make it more maintainable and easier to use for Liquid Galaxy to ensure the best experience for users without cost.